Add first draft of nf-core/config specifications (#4087)
nf-core/website: sites/docs/src/content/docs/specifications/configs/general.md

---
title: General
subtitle: Follow general config guidelines
markdownPlugin: addNumbersToHeadings
weight: 1
---

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", etc. are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

## Permissions

Configs hosted on nf-core/configs SHOULD have permission from the administrators of the given infrastructure to host the config publicly within the nf-core GitHub organisation.

:::tip
A config MAY declare the config is 'unofficial' if the system administrators are OK with hosting publicly, as long as they do not maintain it themselves.
:::

> 

Author: Rephrased but added!

## Size of configs

A single config SHOULD represent a single cluster or type of infrastructure.

A single config MAY include multiple configs using sub `profiles`, when <!-- TODO -->

## Scope of configs

There are two config types:

- **[Institutional config](#institutional-config)** that directs how any pipeline works on a given infrastructure
- **[Pipeline specific config](#pipeline-specific-institutional-config)** that optimises how a specfic pipeline works on a given infrastructure

### Institutional config

An institutional config MUST be compatible with any nf-core pipeline or user.
It defines how the pipeline interacts with the infrastructure, such as scheduling options, software environment settings, and resource limits.

An institutional config SHOULD NOT define any resource defaults with `withName` or `withLabel`.

> 

Author: Will move to documentation

### Pipeline specific institutional config

A pipeline specific config MAY modify the default resource values (memory, CPUs, time).

## Naming

Institutional configs SHOULD use a short name or acronym as the config name.

> The name MUST be used

Author: Don't remember what I was going to say there yet...

---
title: General
subtitle: Follow general config guidelines
markdownPlugin: addNumbersToHeadings
weight: 1
---

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", etc. are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

## Permissions to host on nf-core/configs

Configs hosted on nf-core/configs SHOULD have permission from the administrators of the given infrastructure to host the config publicly within the nf-core GitHub organisation.

:::tip
A config MAY declare the config is 'unofficial' if the system administrators are OK with hosting publicly, as long as they do not maintain it themselves.
:::

## Alignment of config with local policies

> Configurations SHOULD apply with and document administrative policies of the infrastructure as far as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configurations SHOULD comply with and document administrative policies of the infrastructure as far as possible.
```

?

---
title: General
subtitle: Follow general config guidelines
markdownPlugin: addNumbersToHeadings
weight: 1
---

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", etc. are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

## Permissions to host on nf-core/configs

Configs hosted on nf-core/configs SHOULD have permission from the administrators of the given infrastructure to host the config publicly within the nf-core GitHub organisation.

:::tip
A config MAY declare the config is 'unofficial' if the system administrators are OK with hosting publicly, as long as they do not maintain it themselves.
:::

## Alignment of config with local policies

Configurations SHOULD comply with and document administrative policies of the infrastructure as far as possible.
For example, if multiple possible partitions exist but there is a policy to use specific partitions for specific cases, this SHOULD be represented in the config.
Another example is if executing the main Nextflow run command on login/submit nodes is not allowed, include a sample job submission script (for example a SLURM `sbatch` script) in the documentation.

## Size of configs

> A single config SHOULD represent a single cluster or type of infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: My config does not follow this guideline as it consists of multiple clusters, but I think it makes sense in our case as they are all accessible from the same session. The config derives from the user session which cluster they are using and set all cluster-specific configurations automatically. This is very popular with our users and it works really well. Thus I think some exceptions should be allowed here if it makes sense

Author: I think that this is already covered, it says 'SHOULD' rather than 'MUST'.

But if you can think of a clear phrasing to give such an exception, it would be good to add it :)

(e.g. I'm not entirely sure what you mean by 'config derives derives from the user session'... is this like the `hostname` detection stuff?

Reviewer 2: Yeah user need to specify which cluster they want to use using `module load cluster/<cluster_name>`. This updates some environment variables and the config checks those to see which cluster it uses. Maybe we can change this wording to one config per HPC platform or something similar?

Author: I still don' t fully understand exactly, does each HPC have a common login node then or something?

Reviewer 2: Ours does but I can't speak for each HPC system of course, I think it's heavily dependent on the system itself

Reviewer: I don't think we disagree, but given that this is a SHOULD and uses the term infrastructure (which, since it's not all HPC, I think that's the language needed) - can you give a suggestion on complete alternate wording if there's any that would make you happy? (But I definitely see your case being allowed, as is e.g. UPPMAX.)

Reviewer 2: Yeah it's fine, this discussion clarified it and I didn't think of `one type of infrastructure` as being the case for us, but it is. So all good!

Reviewer 3: I just realised why I found this line confusing, which is that we call these "Institutional configs". 

An institution may have multiple infrastructures, which I guess is why we have ended up in this situation with many configs branching over multiple independent systems. Not one to fix now, but perhaps the name also needs to be changed?

> A single config SHOULD represent a single cluster or type of infrastructure.

Author: ```suggestion
A single configuration file SHOULD only be represent a single cluster or type of infrastructure.

For HPC infrastructure, a single config MAY represent multiple similar or linked-HPCs that are dynamically selected within the config
If multiple HPCs are supported in a single config, sub-configs that are selected based on a condition in the main config SHOULD go in in sub directories that are loaded in the main config with `includeConfig()`.
```

For example, for the Max Planck Computing and Data Facilitation (MPCDF) institution that has two HPCs named `raven` and `viper`:

```groovy
mpcdf_raven.conf
mpcdf_viper.conf
```

## Required files

An institutional config MUST consist of two files:

- **`conf/<config name>.conf`** for the config itself.
- **`docs/<config name>.md`** for documentation about the config.

Files for a pipeline-specific institutional config must be located:

- **[`conf/pipeline/<pipeline name>/<config name>.conf`](https://github.com/nf-core/configs/tree/master/conf/pipeline)**
- **[`docs/pipeline/<pipeline name>/<config name>.md`](https://github.com/nf-core/configs/tree/master/docs/pipeline)**

Furthermore, the config MUST be referred to in two additional places

- **[nf-core_custom.config](https://github.com/nf-core/configs/blob/master/nfcore_custom.config)**: so the configs can be loaded by any nf-core pipeline
- **[.github/workflows/main.yml](https://github.com/nf-core/configs/blob/master/.github/workflows/main.yml)**: so the config is tested and linted using the GitHub action CI tests

## Required information

A config MUST have a current contact person responsible for maintaining the config.

> ## Paarameters

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Parameters
```

---
title: General
subtitle: Follow general config guidelines
markdownPlugin: addNumbersToHeadings
weight: 1
---

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", etc. are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

## Permissions to host on nf-core/configs

Configs hosted on nf-core/configs SHOULD have permission from the administrators of the given infrastructure to host the config publicly within the nf-core GitHub organisation.

:::tip
A config MAY declare the config is 'unofficial' if the system administrators are OK with hosting publicly, as long as they do not maintain it themselves.
:::

## Alignment of config with local policies

Configurations SHOULD comply with and document administrative policies of the infrastructure as far as possible.
For example, if multiple possible partitions exist but there is a policy to use specific partitions for specific cases, this SHOULD be represented in the config.
Another example is if executing the main Nextflow run command on login/submit nodes is not allowed, include a sample job submission script (for example a SLURM `sbatch` script) in the documentation.

## Size of configs

> A single configuration file SHOULD only be represent a single cluster or type of infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A single configuration file SHOULD only be used to represent a single cluster or type of infrastructure.
```

For HPC infrastructure, a single config MAY represent multiple similar or linked-HPCs that are dynamically selected within the config

> If multiple HPCs are supported in a single config, sub-configs that are selected based on a condition in the main config SHOULD go in in sub directories that are loaded in the main config with `includeConfig()`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For HPC infrastructure, a single config MAY represent multiple similar or linked-HPCs that are dynamically selected within the config. 

If multiple HPCs are supported in a single config, any sub-configs that are selected based on a condition in the main config MUST be placed in a sub-directory with the same base name as the config file (i.e., for a config called `myinstitute.conf`, a directory named `myinstitute`) and be loaded in the main config with `includeConfig()`.

Example:

    ```tree
    conf/
    ├── <myinstitute>/
    │   ├── <hpc1>.conf
    │   └── <hpc2>.conf
    └── <myinstitute>.conf
    ```
```

IMO this should be a MUST, we don't want sub-configs littering the main directory.

---
title: General
subtitle: Follow general config guidelines
markdownPlugin: addNumbersToHeadings
weight: 1
---

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", etc. are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

## Permissions to host on nf-core/configs

Configs hosted on nf-core/configs SHOULD have permission from the administrators of the given infrastructure to host the config publicly within the nf-core GitHub organisation.

:::tip

> A config MAY declare the config is 'unofficial' if the system administrators are OK with hosting publicly, as long as they do not maintain it themselves.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A config MAY declare the config is 'unofficial' if the system administrators are OK with hosting publicly but do not maintain it themselves.
```

:::

## Alignment of config with local policies

Configurations SHOULD comply with and document administrative policies of the infrastructure as far as possible.
For example, if multiple possible partitions exist but there is a policy to use specific partitions for specific cases, this SHOULD be represented in the config.
Another example is if executing the main Nextflow run command on login/submit nodes is not allowed, include a sample job submission script (for example a SLURM `sbatch` script) in the documentation.

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

## Sensitive data and offline environments

### Sensitive data clusters

Configs for infrastructure handling sensitive or restricted data SHOULD document
any relevant data governance policies that affect pipeline execution.
A config for sensitive data infrastructure SHOULD use a local container registry
rather than pulling from public registries (e.g., Docker Hub, Quay.io).

### Offline/air-gapped clusters

A config for infrastructure without external internet access MUST configure a
local container registry (e.g., via `singularity.registry` or `apptainer.registry`).
It SHOULD set `params.igenomes_ignore = true` and provide paths to locally
available reference genomes instead.

```

:::tip
A config MAY declare the config is 'unofficial' if the system administrators are OK with hosting publicly but do not maintain it themselves.
:::

## Alignment of config with local policies

Configurations SHOULD comply with and document administrative policies of the infrastructure as far as possible.
For example, if multiple possible partitions exist but there is a policy to use specific partitions for specific cases, this SHOULD be represented in the config.
Another example is if executing the main Nextflow run command on login/submit nodes is not allowed, include a sample job submission script (for example a SLURM `sbatch` script) in the documentation.

## Sensitive data and offline environments

### Sensitive data clusters

Configs for infrastructure handling sensitive or restricted data SHOULD document
any relevant data governance policies that affect pipeline execution.
A config for sensitive data infrastructure SHOULD use a local container registry
rather than pulling from public registries (e.g., Docker Hub, Quay.io).

### Offline/air-gapped clusters

A config for infrastructure without external internet access SHOULD configure a

> local container registry (e.g., via `singularity.registry` or `apptainer.registry`).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A config for infrastructure without external internet access SHOULD describe how to set
`singularity.cacheDir` or `apptainer.cacheDir` to a directory pre-populated
using [`nf-core download`](https://nf-co.re/docs/nf-core-tools/cli/pipelines/download) rather than configuring a container registry.
```
This should be more accurate right?

It SHOULD set `params.igenomes_ignore = true` and provide paths to locally
available reference genomes instead.

## Size of configs

### Number of infrastructures in a config

A single configuration file SHOULD only be used to represent a single cluster or type of infrastructure.

For HPC infrastructure, a single config MAY represent multiple similar or linked-HPCs that are dynamically selected within the config.

### Structure when multiple configs

If multiple HPCs are supported in a single config, any sub-configs that are selected based on a condition in the main config MUST be placed in a subdirectory.

> The subdirectory MUST have the same base name as the config file (i.e., for a config called `myinstitute.conf`, a directory named `myinstitute`) and be loaded in the main config with `includeConfig()`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The subdirectory MUST have the same base name as the config file (i.e., for a config called `myinstitute.config`, a directory named `myinstitute`) and be loaded in the main config with `includeConfig()`.
```

Example:

```tree
conf/
├── <myinstitute>/
│   ├── <hpc1>.conf
│   └── <hpc2>.conf

> └── <myinstitute>.conf

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
│   ├── <hpc1>.config
│   └── <hpc2>.config
└── <myinstitute>.config
```

It SHOULD provide reasonable default settings for operating on the infrastructure (e.g. `resourceLimits`, `beforeScript`, `clusterOptions`, `runOptions`).

### Pipeline specific institutional config

A pipeline specific config MAY modify the default resource values (memory, CPUs, time).

Where possible, it's RECOMMENDED to provide defaults for using locally available references and similar resources.

## Naming

### Size of name

Institutional configs SHOULD use a short name or acronym as the config name.

### Formatting

Config names MUST be written (e.g. file names) or referred to (in documentation) in all lowercase letters or numbers.

Configs names MAY use an underscore.
Config names MUST NOT use any other symbols.

### Names when multiple infrastructure in a single institution

When multiple computational infrastructure exist for a single institution, an institutional prefix SHOULD be used.

For example, for the Max Planck Computing and Data Facilitation (MPCDF) institution that has two HPCs named `raven` and `viper`:

```groovy
mpcdf_raven.conf
mpcdf_viper.conf
```

## Required files

An institutional config MUST consist of two files:

> - **`conf/<config name>.conf`** for the config itself.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- **`conf/<config name>.config`** for the config itself.
```

- **`docs/<config name>.md`** for documentation about the config.

Files for a pipeline-specific institutional config must be located:

> - **[`conf/pipeline/<pipeline name>/<config name>.conf`](https://github.com/nf-core/configs/tree/master/conf/pipeline)**

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- **[`conf/pipeline/<pipeline name>/<config name>.config`](https://github.com/nf-core/configs/tree/master/conf/pipeline)**
```

For example, if multiple possible partitions exist but there is a policy to use specific partitions for specific cases, this SHOULD be represented in the config.
Another example is if executing the main Nextflow run command on login/submit nodes is not allowed, include a sample job submission script (for example a SLURM `sbatch` script) in the documentation.

## Sensitive data and offline environments

### Sensitive data clusters

Configs for infrastructure handling sensitive or restricted data SHOULD document
any relevant data governance policies that affect pipeline execution.
A config for sensitive data infrastructure SHOULD use a local container registry
rather than pulling from public registries (e.g., Docker Hub, Quay.io).

### Offline/air-gapped clusters

A config for infrastructure without external internet access MUST configure a
local container registry (e.g., via `singularity.registry` or `apptainer.registry`).
It SHOULD set `params.igenomes_ignore = true` and provide paths to locally

> available reference genomes instead.

Reviewer: Sorry for not being on toe, but I'm not sure I see why these should be `MUST`, @mahesh-panchal (particularly with modules recently being switched to fully qualified).

Reviewer: Of course it will take a while for that to be reflected in all pipelines, but I'm not sure I understand the benefit here anyway (strong enough for must).

Author: Yeah I think 'should' gives more wiggle room here, if it just doesn't work then it doesn't work but that's not _our_ particular issue.

Author: SwitcheD

Reviewer 6: I realise it's perhaps a little more complicated. I don't know what the actual transfer package is when you do `nf-core download` now. Is the expected workflow that a user sets `singularity.cacheDir` instead of `singularity.registry`.
